---
layout: post
title: "NetHack 5.0.0 (is still spoilercore)"
date: 2026-05-23
---

**NetHack** is the strangest game that I regularly get sucked back into. Recently, the DevTeam released version 5.0.0.

The version I'm most familiar with is 3.4.3, which seemed to be the "definitive" version when I started playing as a teenager (c. 2008) and development had already long slowed to a crawl.

I long considered the changes in 3.6.0 and beyond to be a bit disappointing: they mostly served to remove cheesy strategies that I found fun. So I lost interest for a while, until the recent [release of a major version](https://nethack.org/common/index.html) (the first since the 1980s!) made me check in with the DevTeam's progress.

I've enjoyed a lot of the new changes, which have seemingly tried to diversify winning strategies, make the late game more interesting (though not by a lot), and remove "interface screw". For example, the game now prevents you from instantly dying if you accidentally typo your way into a pool of lava. Mind flayers' attacks no longer cause you to forget maps and items, which encouraged the highly un-fun chore of making backup notes outside of the game.

I won as an [orcish Barbarian](https://archive.alt.org/dumplog/chordbug/1778664962.nh500.txt), playing on alt.org, a Telnet server that has hosted NetHack since 2001. Here are some thoughts:

<style>li { margin-top: 1rem; }</style>

* Apparently, the last game I played on this account, in 2019, was also an orcish Barbarian win. Oops! I should have changed it up.
* Dungeon branches are colored now, which is lovely!
* I messed up a Sokoban level because they are randomly mirrored now, which screws with my muscle memory. I'm not sure what the point of the change is but I think it might have worked. *grumble*
* NetHack has a weirdly "secret" defensive stat called *magic cancellation*, not to be confused with *magic resistance*. Roughly speaking, MC defends against magical "touches" whereas MR wards you from ranged spells. It used to be that the cloak of MR also provided maximal MC, but this is no longer true. This well-intentioned balance change seems to make it much more important to think about MC, while leaving it as obscure as it was before. I think it would have been good to present MC next to AC in the status bar.
* Axes now target the spaces diagonally adjacent from where you swing them. This is cool, but I don't understand why there isn't a kind of `paranoid_hit` check about it; holding [Cleaver](https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Cleaver) felt like playing with the [bloodthirsty](https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Bloodthirsty) blade Stormbringer.
* I like the changes to wishes. Instead of getting 5-7 wishes at the Castle, you now get exactly three, with a few more spread out through Gehennom.
* My wishes: three magic markers, cloak of magic resistance, Master Key of Thievery, wand of death. I made my own dragon scale mail, found speed boots in the dungeon, and I created a ring of conflict using polymorph inside Moloch's Sanctum.
* Engravings being visible on the map is a great change (I can see where I wrote [Elbereth](https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Elbereth).)
* Gehennom has caves and wide-corridor mazes now, making it less of a chore to map out. Cool!
* The NetHack Wiki is a bit of a mess. It was written for 3.4.3, and now contains a bunch of outdated information, with updates for later versions straddled between callout boxes and actual edits to the body text. On top of that, it has always contained a bunch of ultra-detailed cruft that is irrelevant to most players. For example, the article about [Vlad](https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Vlad_the_Impaler) has an entire section dedicated to taming him, which is something roughly zero percent of players will ever try to do.

I find NetHack hard to recommend to anyone, but it has a special place in my heart. To master NetHack is to memorize reams of dumb little facts and interactions that you can use to your advantage. I have won over a dozen times, but this game was the first time I ever used the nugget of wisdom that you can dip an [amethyst](https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Amethyst_stone) into [booze](https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Potion_of_booze) to make [fruit juice](https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Potion_of_fruit_juice) --- because, see, fruit juice was [smoky](https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Smoky_and_milky_potions) in my game, and I wanted to get wishes from [djinn](https://nethackwiki.com/wiki/Djinni).

Then again, NetHack inspired Minecraft, which is rather like that too, and it's the best-selling video game of all time. I've been thinking there should be a name for this game design trend: Wikilike? Spoilercore? Tell me about your favorite spoilercore games.
